docs: rewrite the MCP Inspector documentation for v2 (#3143)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: docs/docs/tools/inspector/protocol-eras.mdx

---
title: Protocol eras

> description: How the Inspector negotiates legacy vs. modern MCP, and how every feature changes across the fork

Reviewer: Agree with Bob on the fork working, what about something like:

```suggestion
description: How the Inspector negotiates legacy vs. modern MCP, and how every feature is handled between protocol eras
```

Author: Taken verbatim. The description now reads "…and how every feature is handled between protocol eras."

---

The 2026-07-28 revision of MCP changed enough of the wire protocol that a debugging tool cannot pretend the difference away. The Inspector therefore treats **protocol era** as a first-class, per-server setting, orthogonal to the transport: the same HTTP URL can be inspected as a legacy server or as a modern one, and several tabs render meaningfully different UI and traffic depending on which.

> This page explains the setting, how negotiation works, and then walks the fork feature by feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page explains the setting, how negotiation works, and then walks the protocol version feature by feature.
```

Author: Taken with a tweak: "This page explains the setting, how negotiation works, and then walks the two eras feature by feature."

I kept "eras" rather than "protocol version" here for consistency — the page documents a named setting (`protocolEra` in catalog/config files, the **Protocol Era** selector in Server Settings), and the other pages (web.mdx, cli.mdx, recipes.mdx, configuration.mdx) all use "era" too. Switching two lines to "protocol version" while the heading, table column, and field name stay "era" would read as two different concepts. Your other three suggestions already use "protocol eras", so this lands consistent with those.

<Note>
  **Why `legacy` is the default, and not `auto`.** A debugging tool must not
  auto-probe. A `server/discover` probe stalls against silent legacy stdio
  servers, and it pollutes the recorded transcript you came here to read. Opting
  into `auto` or `modern` is a deliberate act, so what you see in the Protocol
  tab is what your server would have seen from a client behaving the way you
  configured.
</Note>

Version negotiation happens entirely **client-side**. When the web client is used, the Node backend simply pumps JSON-RPC bytes; the `server/discover` probe and the per-request `_meta` envelope travel as ordinary message bodies. Nothing about era selection depends on which of the three clients you use.

Once connected, the negotiated era is reported in the connection header and in **Connection Info**. On a modern connection, `server/discover` also supplies `serverInfo`, `capabilities` (including `extensions`), `instructions`, and the list of `supportedVersions`.

<Frame caption="Server Settings — the Protocol Era selector, with all three choices.">
  <img src="/images/inspector/settings-protocol-era.png" />
</Frame>

> ## Reproducing every fork locally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Reproducing each protocol version locally
```

Author: Same reasoning as above — renamed to `## Reproducing each era locally` rather than "each protocol version", to stay consistent with the `protocolEra` setting name.

I also rewrote the paragraph under it, because Bob flagged the section as a non-sequitur. It is actually load-bearing (every feature section below ends with a "Reproduce with `test-servers/configs/*.json`" pointer, and those configs need the clone/build steps), so instead of removing it I made that connection explicit up front:

> Every section below ends with a **Reproduce with …** pointer to a JSON config. Those configs come from the **composable test servers** shipped in the Inspector repository…

Reproduce with `test-servers/configs/subscriptions-legacy-http.json`, which also serves an `update_resource` tool so you can drive the notification round-trip yourself.

  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Modern">

The same **Subscribe** button instead sends **`subscriptions/listen`**, whose filter carries `resourceSubscriptions` plus the `resourcesListChanged` opt-in, and resolves on `notifications/subscriptions/acknowledged`.

Because the subscription is now a long-lived stream rather than a session flag, the Subscriptions section grows a **stream-status badge** in its header: `Connecting…` → `Listening`. If the stream drops, the Inspector reconnects by re-listing.

Reproduce with `test-servers/configs/subscriptions-modern-http.json`.

  </Tab>
</Tabs>

<Frame caption="A modern subscription: the Subscriptions section carries a LISTENING stream-status badge that a legacy subscription has no need for.">
  <img src="/images/inspector/resources-subscriptions-modern.png" />
</Frame>

---

## Tasks

> Tasks change the most across the fork — including _how the tab is gated_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tasks change the most between protocol eras — including _how the Inspector UI tab is gated_.
```

Author: Taken verbatim, including the "the tab" → "the Inspector UI tab" clarification.
